“Unless you get circumcised . . .
you cannot [get] saved.”
Well, that’s a very strong statement,
especially being made almost 14 years
after Jehovah had made clear that he had
accepted uncircumcised Gentiles
as anointed Christians.
So let’s discuss two lessons
that we can learn from this account.
A first lesson:
Do we place our own conditions
on others to be saved?
Imagine how the Gentile Christians felt.
Brothers associated
with the governing body of that time said,
“Unless you get circumcised . . . ,
you cannot [get] saved.”
As a Gentile brother,
you had made great changes in your life
and morals to become a Christian.
You gave up the worship
of pagan gods and the lifestyle
that was associated
with that to be a Christian.
Maybe you endured a lot of family opposition,
and now you’re being told
you’re not doing enough.
It must have been very discouraging for them,
especially if they already had feelings
that they weren’t already doing enough.
The governing body
sent a letter that clearly stated
what was required for them to be saved.
And look at the reaction of the congregation.
If we look at Acts chapter 15
and verses 30 and 31,
here’s how the congregation
reacted to this letter.
It says: “So when these men were dismissed,
they went down to Antioch,
“and they gathered the whole group together
and handed them the letter.
After reading it,
they rejoiced over the encouragement.”
So how reassured the Gentile Christians
must have been to get that letter!
What a lesson for us not to allow pride
or a self-righteous spirit to push us
to add our own requirements for being saved
instead of sticking to what Jehovah requires!
Now, it’s not just strong words that can make
others feel like they’re not doing enough.
This can also happen by our actions.
And we have an example
of that in Peter’s actions,
because Peter goes to visit Antioch
a few months after the governing body
had that meeting
on the issue of circumcision.
If we look at Galatians chapter 2,
verses 11 and 12,
the apostle Paul tells us what happened.
Galatians 2:11, 12:
“However, when Cephas came to Antioch,
“I resisted him face-to-face,
because he was clearly in the wrong.
“For before certain men from James arrived,
“he used to eat with people of the nations;
but when they arrived,
“he stopped doing this and separated himself,
fearing those of the circumcised class.”
Now, it’s interesting that the study note
on these verses says this:
“Peter’s conduct
could have undermined a decision
“that the governing body [had] made
“in the same year
as Peter’s visit, about 49 C.E.
“[Now,] that decision
had confirmed that Gentile Christians
“were not required to obey the Mosaic Law.
“[And] Paul here reviews the incident
at Antioch, not to embarrass Peter,
but to adjust a wrong view
held among the Galatians.”
So Peter, in this case,
did not say to people,
‘You must be circumcised,’
but by not eating with the Gentile friends
while “certain men from James” were there,
his actions had a similar chilling effect.
He made the Gentile brothers feel inferior
to the Jewish Christians
who were circumcised.
Now, could we make others feel that way?
One sister told us an experience
she had on a tour group
for an international convention.
Another sister in the same group
would ask each person in the group,
“Are you a pioneer?”
Now, if the person answered yes,
she spent time talking to them
and getting to know them.
If the person said no,
she moved on very quickly.
When the sister came to our sister
and asked her,
she said she wasn’t a pioneer,
and the sister moved on quickly.
Our sister said it made her feel awful.
She already felt like she wasn’t
doing enough to serve Jehovah.
She had been a pioneer,
but now she was taking care
of her sick parents.
So, what is the lesson for us?
By our words or by our actions,
we can add
our own requirements to being saved,
which can really discourage others.
If we stick, though,
to Jehovah’s requirements for being saved,
we can rejoice
along with our brothers and sisters.
Here’s a second lesson:
Do we recognize when we need
to take a question or a matter to oversight?
The brothers who had told the Gentiles,
‘You must be circumcised
in order to be saved,’
had really taken it upon themselves to speak
for the governing body of that time.
The governing body said at Acts 15:24:
‘Be assured that message
did not come from us.’
So, clearly, those brothers
did not speak for the governing body.
Now, Paul and Barnabas were faced
with the same question about circumcision.
Would they make the same mistake
and take it upon themselves
to speak for the governing body?
To assist Paul
to handle the matter correctly,
his overseer, Jesus, provided some direction.
In Galatians 2:2,
the apostle Paul says
that he took the matter to Jerusalem
“as a result of a revelation.”
And again, if you look
at the study note on Galatians 2:2,
it says this:
“Paul here adds a detail
“not found in Luke’s account
in the book of Acts.
“Christ, as the head
of the Christian congregation,
“apparently used a revelation
“to direct Paul to bring
the important issue of circumcision
to the apostles and elders in Jerusalem.”
Yes, Jesus directed Paul
to work through the governing body.
Now, I suppose Jesus could have
simply told Paul in the revelation:
‘Paul, you understand it correctly.
Just go ahead and handle it.’
And I’m sure Paul would have probably
thought that would have been a lot easier.
‘I don’t have to go all the way to Jerusalem.
‘I don’t have to deal
with all those other brothers
that have these strong views
about circumcision.’
But, rather,
Jesus was training Paul and others
on how he wanted
questions like this to be handled
—through the governing body.
Jesus did not bypass
the arrangement that he had set up.
And the fact that Jesus
handled the matter this way back then
sets an example for us today
of how Jesus expects
his modern-day organization to work as well.
So we might ask,
‘Do we recognize when we need
to take a question
or a matter to a higher authority?’
Well, it’s not always easy, is it?
Can I decide this one on my own,
or do I need to ask?
Proverbs 13:10 says:
“Presumptuousness leads only to strife,
but wisdom belongs to those who seek advice.”
Wives have to decide,
‘Can I make this decision on my own,
or do I need to take it to my husband?’
Elders, ‘Can I make this decision on my own,
or do I take it to the body of elders?’
Body of elders need to take it
to the circuit overseer
or to the branch office,
and so on it goes.
I’m sure we have all had moments
when we’ve made a decision
or sometimes we’re about to take action
and someone says to us:
“Did you ask oversight about that?”
“Uh, well, no.”
“Don’t you think we should?”
“Uh, yeah, that would be a great idea.”
See, those are a learning experiences.
By experience and training,
we learn what things we can and should handle
and what things need
to be taken to our oversight.
So in review, our first lesson:
By our words or actions,
we can add
our own requirements for being saved,
which can really discourage others.
However, if we stick
to Jehovah’s requirements for being saved,
we can rejoice
along with our brothers and sisters.
And our second lesson:
Like Paul, be obedient.
Be ready to be trained
in how to handle matters
according to theocratic direction.